\section*{Generating STL Files}

Many folks who use OpenSCAD generate {\it STL} files from their design. These
files are used as part of the 3D printing process. Although I wish we could 3D
print flyable model airplanes, that is not what we will do with the STL files
in this project.

STL stands for {\it Standard Tessellation Library} \citep{stlwiki}. Translated,
that means an STL file is a list of triangular objects that describe the
surface of a 3D object. These triangles cover the surface making a ``water
tight'' approximation to the real surface. Triangles are guaranteed to be flat
in the 3D space, and if they are tiny enough, they can be rendered to create a
3D display of the object, or sent to a 3D printer after suitable processing of all
the triangles so the printer knows where the surface is (that is a topic for
another article!)

My purpose in introducing these triangles is simple. I want to know how much my
model will weigh, and I want to know where the center of gravity will be when
the design is constructed. Figuring out these two details is impossible using
conventional building techniques: you build the model, weight it, anf figure
out the center of gravity manually. Computer geeks never do anything manually
if they can get their computer to do the work.

I found a nice Python library that is all set up to figure out the volume of a
3D shape defined in an STL file, and return it's center of gravity location. It
is simple enough to add in the predicted wood density for the design and come
up with a weight estimate for each part. A little post-processing of all this
data will give us some estimate of the total designs weight. Unfortunately,
figuring out the weight of the glue is not so simple. For that we need to know
where each glue joint will be and the surface area of the glue joint. I am
working on that problem now, but am not ready to show any results yet. 

Knowing where each part will be placed in the final design, and the CG data for
that part will let us predict the CG for the complete model as well! 
